A LOT of changes (#22)
martinthomson/alt-svcb: draft-thomson-httpbis-alt-svcb.md

--- abstract

HTTP servers deployments that include multiple service endpoints can use
alternative services to direct clients to use a different service endpoint.

This document obsoletes RFC 7838.

--- middle

# Introduction

HTTP origins are often comprised of multiple service endpoints.  This can be
driven by multiple requirements, such as a need to scale by adding multiple
physical servers, the need to place endpoints in network locations that are
closer to clients for performance reasons, or the need to support multiple HTTP
versions, like HTTP/2 {{H2}} or HTTP/3 {{H3}}.

> For servers that operate multiple service endpoints, it can be advantageous - or
> even necessary - to have clients make requests to a specific service endpoint.

Author: ```suggestion
For servers that operate multiple service endpoints, it can be advantageous to
have clients make requests to a specific service endpoint.
```

--- abstract

HTTP servers deployments that include multiple service endpoints can use
alternative services to direct clients to use a different service endpoint.

This document obsoletes RFC 7838.

--- middle

# Introduction

> HTTP servers are often comprised of multiple service endpoints.  This can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HTTP origins are often comprised of multiple service endpoints.  This can be
```

driven by multiple requirements, such as a need to scale by adding multiple
physical servers, the need to place endpoints in network locations that are
closer to clients for performance reasons, or the need to support multiple HTTP
versions, like HTTP/2 {{H2}} or HTTP/3 {{H3}}.

For servers that operate multiple service endpoints, it can be advantageous - or

> even necessary - to have clients make requests to a specific service endpoint.

Reviewer: I'm dubious that an optional behavior can ever be necessary.

* Some deployments might seek to direct a client to a service endpoint that is
  better able to serve requests for that client.  This might occur if DNS
  resolution of the server name produces the address of a server instance that
  is further from the client.

* Servers that might seek to reduce load, perhaps in anticipation of an imminent
  shutdown or maintenance action, might use an alternative service declaration

>   to reduce either server load or the number of clients that might be affected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Servers might seek to reduce load, perhaps in anticipation of an imminent
  shutdown or maintenance action. An alternative service declaration
  can reduce either server load or the number of clients that might be affected.
```

* Many deployments of HTTP/3 {{H3}} use the protocol identifiers in an
  alternative service declaration to make clients aware of support for the newer
  protocol.

HTTP alternative services provide a means of indicating to clients which service

> instances a server would prefer be used for future requests.  Clients use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
endpoints a server would prefer be used for future requests.  Clients use
```

alternative service advertisements as prompt to discover and use these more
preferred service endpoints.

Clients that learn about an alternative service can establish a connection to
the identified service endpoint, which - if successfully established and
authenticated - is then used for future requests.  Any existing connections the
client has are retained and used until the new connection is successful.  This
ensures that clients can continue making requests of the server without
interruption.

## Previous Alternative Services Designs

> RFC 7838 {{!ALT-SVC=RFC7838}} provided the first alternative service design for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RFC 7838 {{?ALT-SVC=RFC7838}} provided the first alternative service design for
```
Informative elsewhere in the doc

HTTP.  This design turned out to have a number of shortcomings in deployment.
Though these issues were anticipated in the design, the measures that were used
often did not work particularly well.

The RFC 7838 design included caching logic based on setting an "ma" (or max-age)
parameter.  This turned out to be challenging for many server deployments.

> Setting too a large max-age meant that clients used the indicated service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting too large a max-age meant that clients used the indicated service
```

endpoint for longer than was desired when operating conditions changed.
Conversely, a short cache period for an advertisement for HTTP/3 resulted in
frequently reverting to earlier versions might be used more often than is

> optimal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
frequently reverting to previous versions on subsequent connections.
```

this process works in more detail.

## Conventions and Definitions {#terms}

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

The terms "server" and "client" are defined in {{HTTP}}.  The term "origin" is
defined in {{ORIGIN}}.

*[server]: #terms
*[client]: #terms
*[origin]: #terms

The term "alternative name" refers to the name advertised by a server to a
client.  This refers to a domain name that is queried by the client to discover
both service names and service endpoints.

*[alternative name]: #terms

> *[alternative names]: #terms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*[alternative names]: #terms (((alternative name)))
```

A "service name" is the TargetName from an HTTPS ServiceMode record {{SVCB}}.
Service names, their associated parameters (SvcParams), and IP addresses
describe a "service endpoint".  Clients establiish connections to service
endpoints in order to make requests of a server.

*[service name]: #terms
*[service endpoint]: #terms

> *[service endpoints]: #terms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*[service endpoints]: #terms (((service endpoint)))
```

authoritative.  Unlike an alternative name or service name, an origin name can
be an IP address rather than a domain name.

*[origin name]: #terms

There can be different values for origin name, alternative name, and service
name.

# Using Alternative Services {#use}

A server advertises the availability of alternative services by providing the
client with an alternative name.  The server does this using either a field in a
response ({{field}}) or an HTTP/2 or HTTP/3 frame ({{frame}}).

When a client receives a new alternative name from a server, they SHOULD attempt
to discover and use the service endpoints referred to by that name for future
requests to that server.

In order to discover and use the identified service endpoints, the client
attempts to make a request for a resource on the same server using the provided
alternative name as follows:

1. The client makes a DNS query for HTTPS records for the alternative name,
   following the procedures in {{Section 3 of SVCB}}.  Clients make this query
   as a "SVCB-reliant" client, treating missing or unobtainable HTTPS records as
   a failure.  If this process fails to produce service parameters or IP

>    addresses, abort this process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   addresses, the process is aborted.
```

2. The client establishes a connection using the service parameters and
   addresses learned from the DNS query.  The client uses the origin name in any
   TLS server name indication {{!SNI=RFC6066}} of the server name from the URL,
   not the alternative name.  This allows the server to produce a certificate
   for the origin name, which the client can validate as applying to the URL it

>    is resolving.  If a connection cannot be established, abort this process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   is resolving.  If a connection cannot be established, the process is aborted.
```

3. The client validates that the server is authoritative for the resource using
   the server origin name.  If the server is not authoritative, abort this

>    process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the server origin name.  If the server is not authoritative, the
   process is aborted.
```

4. The client makes a query for the resource.  If the server does not respond or
   responds with a 421 (Misdirected Request) (see {{Section 15.5.20 of HTTP}}),

>    abort this process.  A client MAY re-attempt a request or request another

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the process is aborted.  A client MAY re-attempt a request or request another
```

   resource if the server responds with a 5xx status code (see {{Section 15.6 of

>    HTTP}}).

Reviewer: We should probably discuss this. Retrying on a 500 is new.

5. Once a response is received, the connection to the alternative service
   endpoint is complete.  Any other connections can be closed and future
   requests directed to the new connection.  The client SHOULD remember the
   alternative name and the service name that were used; see {{remember}}.

> A client MAY send additional requests using the newly established connection to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A client MAY send multiple requests using the newly established connection to
```

the alternative service after it verifies that the server is authoritative.

> However, a client MUST NOT remember a service name until a request has been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, a client MUST NOT remember a service name until at least one request has been
```

previous advertisement.  An alternative name is only removed when replaced with
a different alternative name or when a remembered service name does not appear
in the set of HTTPS query responses (see {{reuse}}).

After a failed attempt to use an alternative service, a failure is remembered by
retaining the alternative name without a service name.  This avoids making
repeated attempts to use an alternative service that is not available, even if
the server repeats the alternative name.  A client MAY periodically attempt to
retry a failed alternative if the information is repeated.

A server can explicitly request that a client remove any remembered service name
by providing an alternative name of "invalid".  The "invalid" domain name
corresponds to a DNS name that will never successfully resolve (see {{Section
6.4 of ?SUDN=RFC6761}}), which guarantees that an attempt to use this name
cannot succeed.  Clients MAY recognize the alternative name "invalid" as special
and avoid any attempt to use this to discover an alternative service.

## Reusing Alternatives {#reuse}

In subsequent connections to the same server, clients make HTTP queries for the

> origin name of the server.  If this query returns a ServiceMode resource record

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In subsequent connections to the same origin, clients make a DNS query for
HTTPS records for the origin name.  If, after following any CNAME or
AliasMode records, this query returns a ServiceMode resource record
```

(RR) that includes a TargetName that is identical to the service name that is
remembered for the request origin, the client SHOULD choose that over any

> alternatives.  This ignores any SvcPriority attributes that might cause other

Reviewer: This sentence is ridiculously long, but I don't currently have anything better.

query for "example.com" and receive in response:

~~~ dns
example.com. 7200 IN HTTPS 1 . port=443
example.com. 7200 IN HTTPS 10 alt1.example. port=8443
example.com. 7200 IN HTTPS 10 alt2.example. port=8443
example.com. 7200 IN HTTPS 10 alt2.example. port=8443
~~~

Under normal conditions, the SvcPriority of the "alt?.example" RRs would indicate

> that it is not preferred, so the "example.com" record would be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that they are not preferred, so the "example.com" record would be used.
```

provided by the server:

~~~ dns

> alt1.example. 7200 IN HTTPS 1 . port=443 alt-only mandatory=alt-only

Reviewer: Should this be
```suggestion
example.com. 7200 IN HTTPS 1 alt1.example. port=443 alt-only mandatory=alt-only
```

example.com.  7200 IN HTTPS 2 . port=443
~~~

## Servers Identified by IP {#ip}

An alternative name can be provided by a server that is identified by an IP
address or host names that are not domain names.  However, HTTPS queries cannot
be made for servers that are not identified by a domain name.  This makes reuse

> ({{reuse}}) impossible for such names.  A client MAY disable alternative

Reviewer: Not just reuse -- you can't point to them for the current session. It makes un-named servers impossible to reference as alternatives.

> be made for servers that are not identified by a domain name.  This makes reuse
> ({{reuse}}) impossible for such names.  A client MAY disable alternative

Author: ```suggestion
be made for servers that are not identified by a domain name.  This makes it
impossible to use such identifiers.  A client MAY disable alternative
```

# Security Considerations {#security}

Alternative services present servers with a way of influencing how clients
select service endpoints.  This does not change how a service endpoint might be
determined to be authoritative (even more so than its predecessor; see

> {{authority7838}}), but this.

Reviewer: This sentence seems to stop mid-thought.

Author: ```suggestion
determined to be authoritative (even more so than its predecessor; see
{{authority7838}}).
```

change this analysis, though it can make attacks less feasible for some classes
of attacker and so use is encouraged.

## Attacks From Within Servers

In addition to network-based attackers, we also consider the possibility that an
alternative service is advertised by an adversary who is able to generate HTTP
responses.  An adversary might be given the ability to generate responses for a
subset of the resources on a server, where they might provide an Alt-SvcB field
in a response.

This gives such an adversary some ability to direct clients toward a service
endpoint of their choosing; see {{sec-endpoint}}.  It also potentially allows an
adversary to create an unending sequence of alternatives; see {{sec-loop}}.

Servers can mitigate these risks by restricting access to the ability of
advertising an alternative name.

## Tracking Clients

Remembering alternative names and service names might allow a server to connect
activity at different times to the same client.  Clients might be assigned a
unique alternative name and service name in order to make return connections
identifiable.  The need for the service name to appears the set of HTTPS records

> at the origin name does limit the ability of servers to individual track clients

Reviewer: ```suggestion
at the origin name does limit the ability of servers to track individual clients
```

--- back

# Authoritative Information in RFC 7838 {#authority7838}

This design differs from RFC 7838, where alternative services advertisements
were treated as authoritative information.  Clients therefore might have been
less concerned about attacks that compromise the integrity of alternative
services when using RFC 7838.

Though integrity protection might appear to be valuable, it results in
conflicts.  For instance, information about the protocol is ostensibly authentic
when provided in Alt-Svc fields or ALTSVC frames.  However, protocol support is
also authenticated when establishing a connection.  This creates a potential
conflict between two sources of the same information.

Conflicts also arise when alternative service information is retained as any
retained state might disagree with what is currently deployed.  This design

> avoids this contention by having the entire service resolution process occur

Reviewer: ```suggestion
avoids this contention by delegating the service resolution process
```
